---
author: Kevin Brennan
title: Web Automation
date: 2023-12-18
summary: My exploration of web automation using JavaScript, Playwright, and AutoHotkey.

# cover:
#     image: "cover-post-web-automation.png"
---

Web automation refers to automating interactions with websites. This can be done for a variety of reasons, such as
testing a website, scraping data from a website, or automating a task that would otherwise be tedious to do by hand.
My exploration of web automation will explore JavaScript, Playwright, and AutoHotkey. I will discuss each method
and the advantages and disadvantages of each, with a particular focus on detectability.

Detectability is important to discuss in the current age of web technology, where automation is fought more and
more by detection scripts like reCaptcha v3 and Cloudflare bot detection, among others. For good reason, too. No
website owner wants their website to be scraped by bots and have their work made irrelevant by other websites
reposting their content or fed into large language models. There are, however, still moral, smaller-scale
applications of automation, and having working methods is important.

## JavaScript
One of the easiest ways to get into web automation is simply using JavaScript in the browser. This can be done
using your browser's developer console or using a JavaScript-injection extension
([Violentmonkey](https://github.com/violentmonkey/violentmonkey) works on both Firefox and Chrome and is
open-source.) This method covers the majority of use-cases.

As a very easy example, try clicking the button below and observe the result:

<script>
    function clickExampleButton(event) {
        alert((event.isTrusted) ? "You clicked the button!" : "You used JavaScript to click the button!");
    }
</script>
<button id="example-button" type="button" onclick="clickExampleButton(event)">Click me</button>

Now, try doing the same thing with JavaScript by entering the developer console
(<kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>Shift</kbd>+<kbd>I</kbd> on Chrome or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>Shift</kbd>+<kbd>K</kbd> on
Firefox), and type the following:  
`document.querySelector('#example-button').click()`

Both clicking the button above and using JavaScript to click the button will result in an alert. However, the
message is different when using JavaScript. This is because websites can easily distinguish whether an action was
performed by a user or by JavaScript. The technical details for this detection are as follows: when a user performs
an action, an `Event` object is generated and passed to event handlers. This object contains an
immutable property set by the browser called `isTrusted`, which is `true` when the event was
generated by a user and `false` when the event was generated by JavaScript. So a website (and bot
protection script) need only check whether `event.isTrusted === false` to see if an action was performed
by JavaScript.

## Playwright/Puppeteer/Selenium
[Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) is a library used for creating and controlling browser instances
(Chrome, Firefox, Edge or Safari) for the purpose of test automation. Other similar libraries include
[Puppeteer](https://pptr.dev/) (which only supports Chrome) and
[Selenium](https://www.selenium.dev/) (which has been around much longer). All of these libraries are
similar and have the same fundamental advantages and disadvantages.

These libraries work by creating a browser instance and then allowing you to send commands to the browser. These
commands include navigating to a URL, clicking an element, querying for information on a webpage, typing text, etc.
One advantage over plain JavaScript is that the `Event.isTrusted` property is set to true for any events
generated. This avoids that very trivial detection method.

There are, however, other ways to detect automation from these libraries. This includes a numerous list of
JavaScript APIs that are modified in the browser instance, User-Agent strings, and the existence of extra global
JavaScript variables created by the libraries for their functionality. For that reason, there are packages like
playwright-stealth, puppeteer-extra-plugin-stealth and selenium-stealth, which attempt to hide these discrepancies
from normal browsers. However, these packages are not perfect at hiding the numerous differences and are not
necessarily kept up to date.

## AutoHotkey
[AutoHotkey](https://www.autohotkey.com/) is an automation scripting language for Windows capable of
automating many operating system tasks like keyboard and mouse actions. It is very powerful and can be used for a
variety of tasks, including web automation. All you need is to use a normal browser and create an AutoHotkey script
capable of interacting with the web content through keyboard and mouse commands.

While AutoHotkey is not purpose-built for web automation, it's possible to query for the browser window position
and size, take a screenshot, then use `ImageSearch` to look for coordinates of a particular part of the
page. This gives you the ability to interact with elements on the page given how they look.

This is notably less convenient than using JavaScript or a purpose-built web automation library because you can't
directly query for elements, but it has the advantage of not being nearly as detectable by the website. It uses the
same browser as a normal user, and the `Event.isTrusted` value is true because as far as the browser is
concerned, the user is performing the actions. The only way to detect this is to observe mouse movements or typing
speed to determine if a bot is performing the actions, but this can also be mitigated by slightly randomizing
movements and timing and making typing speed more realistic.

## Conclusion
There are many ways to automate web tasks, and each has its own advantages and disadvantages. JavaScript is the
easiest to get started with, but is also the most detectable. Playwright/Puppeteer/Selenium are more difficult to
get started with, but are slightly less detectable, especially with precautions. AutoHotkey is the most difficult
to get started with, but is the least detectable with only mouse and keyboard interactions to monitor.

In general, I would recommend JavaScript for most tasks like userscripts for improving website functionality while
you're using it. For actual testing of your own websites or automation on websites that don't employ bot detection,
Playwright/Puppeteer/Selenium are good options because of their convenience and programming language bindings,
which are useful for actually processing the data from the automation. For automation on websites that employ bot
detection, AutoHotkey is the best option because of its low detectability when the correct precautions are taken.